Define a common algorithm for service.instance.id (#312)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/resource/README.md

<!-- semconv service_experimental -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `service.instance.id` | string | The string ID of the service instance. [1] | `627cc493-f310-47de-96bd-71410b7dec09` | Recommended |
| `service.namespace` | string | A namespace for `service.name`. [2] | `Shop` | Recommended |

**[1]:** MUST be unique for each instance of the same `service.namespace,service.name` pair (in other words
`service.namespace,service.name,service.instance.id` triplet MUST be globally unique). The ID helps to
distinguish instances of the same service that exist at the same time (e.g. instances of a horizontally scaled
service).

> Implementations are recommended to generate a random Version 1 or Version 4 [RFC

Reviewer: What is an implementation in this context? On first read I read it as an OpenTelemetry SDK, but the following phrase made me think it was addressing end users instead (or maybe as well?):

> but are free to use an inherent unique ID as the source of this value if stability is desirable

I think we need to make two things clear:
- Users can and should set `service.instance.id` if they desire a stable value
- SDK implementations SHOULD provide a random fallback v1/v4 uuid if the user hasn't already provided a value

WDYT? Do you agree with this? Do you think the text already implies that and I'm reading into it too much?

Reviewer: > SDK implementations SHOULD provide a random fallback v1/v4 uuid if the user hasn't already provided a value

The reason I want to make this clear is that in the past I've tried to add fallback random uuid `service.instance.id` to the opentelemetry java SDK but received pushed back that the spec / semantic conventions is ambiguous abut this. I want to make sure that we're very clear that this is the intent.

Author: An implementation here is typically an SDK, but might be a Collector (if it has enough information to make a good service.instance.id). The "inherent unique ID" phrasing is because some platforms might have an ID that is unique to that execution (like lambdas) or unique to the workload (like the Erlang example that @jsuereth mentioned elsewhere).

In the typical case, SDKs will be generating UUIDs.

4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID, but are free to use an inherent unique ID as the source of
this value if stability is desirable. In that case, the ID SHOULD be used as source of a UUID Version 5 and

> SHOULD use the following UUID as the namespace: `4d63009a-8d0f-11ee-aad7-4c796ed8e320`.

Reviewer 2: don't understand what it means to "use UUID as the namespace"

Author: UUID v5 has a namespace. Previous versions of the PR had an example showing this, but perhaps this would help see where this namespace is used: https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/google/uuid#NewSHA1

Reviewer 3: The RFC also explains how namespace is used to generate a v5 UUID: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122#page-13

UUIDs are typically recommended, as only an opaque value for the purposes of identifying a service instance is
needed. Similar to what can be seen in the man page for the
[`/etc/machine-id`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html) file, the underlying
data, such as pod name and namespace should be treated as confidential, being the user's choice to expose it
or not via another resource attribute.

> For applications running behind an application server, such as unicorn, a stable identifier is not desirable,

Reviewer 4: I'm still not comfortable with this wording.  "Stable identifier" is the concerning wording here for me.

```
For applications running behind an application server (like unicorn), we do not recommend *one identifier for all processes participating in the application*.  Instead, each division (e.g. a worker thread in unicorn) should have its own instance.id.
```

The point here is not about a stable identifier, but about *what* to identify.

as each worker thread typically is seen as a different instance. For those cases, a UUID v1/v4 is always
recommended.

> Collectors aren't recommended to set a `service.instance.id`: any identifying information that the Collector

Reviewer 4: I'm not a huge fan of this paragraph.

E.g. in the collector we have a `mysql` receiver that can pull mysql database metrics.  For `service.instance.id` id DOES know an IP address it talks to, and could define an instance.id there.

I think usage of `service.instance.id` and the collector should NOT be restricted, and instead let users figure out best practices over time.

From a semocnv standpoint, we should just:

1. Define the *meaning* of attribute.
2. Outline a recommended way of generating the output.

Author: True, I had the case where the collector gets telemetry from an application via OTLP in mind but didn't consider scraping receivers. I still think it's useful to have some language here to avoid having a Collector implementation without taking into account the nuances we talked about here so extensively already. My major concern is the "two containers in a pod" use case, where both containers would have most of the same information but will typically lack a `container.id` or name. 

I gave it another shot. Let me know what you all think. If you still think it should be left out, I'll remove it.

service instance that is generating that telemetry. For instance, creating an UUID based on `pod.name` will

> likely be wrong, as the Collector likely doesn't know whether there are multiple containers within that pod.

Reviewer 3: This statement is not correct. The Collector's k8s processor knows how many containers are in the pod, see https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/afbd318cd8b350aa7b91d0dd87e385572e1a201f/processor/k8sattributesprocessor/internal/kube/client.go#L711

The general idea is correct but this particular sentence probably needs to be removed or replaced by another example.

Reviewer 3: SGTM.

Author: Updated! Thank you for spotting this.

| `service.namespace` | string | A namespace for `service.name`. [2] | `Shop` | Recommended |

**[1]:** MUST be unique for each instance of the same `service.namespace,service.name` pair
(in other words `service.namespace,service.name,service.instance.id` triplet MUST be globally unique).
The ID helps to distinguish instances of the same service that exist at the same time
(e.g. instances of a horizontally scaled service). It is preferable for the ID to be persistent
and stay the same for the lifetime of the service instance, however it is acceptable that
the ID is ephemeral and changes during important lifetime events for the service
(e.g. service instance restarts).

If the instance has no inherent unique ID that can be used as the value of this attribute,
implementations MAY to generate a random Version 1 or Version 4
[RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. When enough data is available,
implementations SHOULD use Version 5 and MUST use the following UUID as the namespace:
`4d63009a-8d0f-11ee-aad7-4c796ed8e320`.

> UUIDs are typically recommended, as we only need an opaque yet reproducible value for
> the purposes of identifying a service instance. Similar to what can be seen in the man page for the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
UUIDs are typically recommended, as only an opaque yet reproducible value for
the purposes of identifying a service instance is needed. Similar to what can be seen in the man page for the
```

Is `we`-language even used in the spec? Just a minor suggestion

[`/etc/machine-id`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html) file,
the underlying data, such as pod name and namespace should be treated as
confidential by this algorithm, being the user's choice to expose it or not via another resource attribute.

When a UUID v5 is generated, the input SHOULD be prefixed with
`${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}`, followed by the
the workload identifier, which should tentatively be stable. The workload identifier is the final piece of
information making the source of telemetry to be uniquely idenfiable. For instance, it might be the `container.name`
in containerized or Kubernetes environments. This means that the same service yields the
same UUID if the same identifier (`host.id`, `/etc/machine-id`, and so on) remains the same. It would still
yield different results for different services on the same host or namespace. When no namespaces or equivalent fields
are available, the prefix MUST then be `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}`.

> SDKs MUST provide a `service.instance.id`. SDKs SHOULD use the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`:

Reviewer 4: > SDKs MUST provide a `service.instance.id`.

When the TC decided to split Semantic Conventions, we agreed to certain responsibilities of each specification.

TL;DR; This requirement MUST be moved into the OTEL specification.

Longer answer:

- The Semconv can define format + definition of attributes.
- The Specification defines behavior of SDK.

Since this would place a requirement that should be on the "spec-compliance-matrix" for SDKs, this needs to be defined in the OTEL Specification (likely under the `Resource` section).  I suggest we remove this sentence from semconv, and get your change merged.  We can then open a specification PR to require `service.isntance.id` and add the configuration component of it, where users can provide it via ENV variable or config file.

Reviewer 6: This also affects the whole section of [Semantic Attributes with SDK-provided Default Value
](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/tree/main/docs/resource#semantic-attributes-with-sdk-provided-default-value):

> ## Semantic Attributes with SDK-provided Default Value
>
> These are the attributes which MUST be provided by the SDK as specified in the [Resource SDK specification](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/resource/sdk.md#sdk-provided-resource-attributes):
>
> - [`service.name`](#service)
> - [`telemetry.sdk` group](#telemetry-sdk)

Author: @pyohannes, is there a ticket for this?

Author: Created: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/3839

> SDKs MUST provide a `service.instance.id`. SDKs SHOULD use the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`:

Reviewer 4: See: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/312#discussion_r1456014150

TL;DR; this can't exist as a requirement in Semconv, needs to be moved to the Specification.

- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment

>   variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this MUST take priority over generated IDs.

Reviewer 6: A small nit, but I wonder whether it makes sense to move this out of the algorithm description. Here it's defined as part of an algorithm that _SHOULD_ be used, at least theoretically leaving room to override an instance id specified by a user (which should never happen).

In general, I'm not 100% what the implications are of a "MUST" requirement in the description of an algorithm that "SHOULD" be used. I guess it's not technically a "MUST", as you can decide not to use the algorithm? 

For that reason, I'd prefer to make the first point a "MUST" outside the algorithm definition (it applies regardless of what algorithm is used), and formulate the rest of the algorithm without normative language, like:
> 1. If `k8s.namespace.name`, `k8s.pod.name`, and `k8s.container.name` are available, generate a UUID v5 with the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${k8s.namespace.name}.${service.name}.${k8s.pod.name}.${k8s.container.name}`.
> 2. If `container.id` is available, create an UUID v5 with the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${container.id}`
> 3. If `container.id` is available, create an UUID v5 with the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${host.id}`.
> 4. If `/etc/machine-id` is available (or alternatively `HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Cryptography\MachineGuid` on Windows), create an UUID v5 with the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${machine.id}`.
> 5. Otherwise, generate a value using UUID v1 or v4.

Author: I think this deserves a discussion on the PR that I'll open as part of the the spec. But one part I can address right now:

> In general, I'm not 100% what the implications are of a "MUST" requirement in the description of an algorithm that "SHOULD" be used. I guess it's not technically a "MUST", as you can decide not to use the algorithm?

What I had in mind was: SDKs are likely unaware of service.instance.id right now and might stay like that for the foreseeable future. Some SDKs might decide to implement this algorithm, and if they do so, they should really follow this algorithm.

Of course, we can still discuss whether a MUST is warranted here, so that all SDKs are aligned in how they do things, or if a SHOULD has to be used, so that they may align, but don't have to.

- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment
  variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this MUST take priority over generated IDs.
- When any of the below combinations of resource attribute are provided, they MUST be used as the input
  for generating a UUID v5 following the prefix mentioned above. The values within each combination MUST be separated with dots:

>   * `container.id`, resulting in the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${container.id}`

Reviewer 5: Having `container.id` available at SDK runtime is very unreliable. Current resource detector implementations use /proc files that exposte that ID by accident, see https://github.com/containerd/containerd/issues/8185 for more details.

Reviewer 5: That makes sense, to not infer it, but then I struggle a little bit with the current structure of this paragraph:

1. > Users running their services on platforms such as Kubernetes are encouraged to explicitly set the
`service.instance.id` using their existing automation [...]

2. > SDKs MUST use the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`: [...]
   > When any of the below combinations of resource attribute are provided, they MUST be used as the input [...]
   > * `container.id` [...]
   > * `k8s.namespace.name`/`k8s.pod.name`/`k8s.container.name` [...]

3. > When no other source is available the SDK MUST generate a value using UUID v1 or v4.
   > This would also typically be the case for service instances running on Kubernetes,

If I run K8s, I am (1) encouraged to use automation to set the id, (2) I MUST use the container.*, k8s.* values and (3) the typical case for me is that the ID is set randomly. 

I assume there is some order hidden in the intended implementation like (1) use automation and inject the ID via env, (2) use the values if available, (3) set a random value 

But it is opaque to me.

Author: Some thoughts:

* 1 - The _best_ is for users to specify the service.instance.id manually: they are the service owners, they know if two containers on the same pod should be treated as one service or not. 
* 1 - The Operator might in the future implement a flag to allow it to generate reliable service.instance.id, given that it has all the information necessary for that.
* 2 - Users might not want to set the whole service.instance.id on their side, but might set things like container.name via Helm. We can then use all the information we have to generate a stable service.instance.id.
* 3 - When we don't have enough information, the SDK should generate a random one

Reviewer 5: I like this order of priorities, do you think this can be encoded in the algorithm you have outlined here?

Author: Done. Can you take another look?

Reviewer 5: LGTM now, thanks for writing this down in such a comprehensive manner

and stay the same for the lifetime of the service instance, however it is acceptable that
the ID is ephemeral and changes during important lifetime events for the service
(e.g. service instance restarts).

If the instance has no inherent unique ID that can be used as the value of this attribute,
implementations MAY to generate a random Version 1 or Version 4
[RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. When enough data is available,
implementations SHOULD use Version 5 and MUST use the following UUID as the namespace:
`4d63009a-8d0f-11ee-aad7-4c796ed8e320`.

UUIDs are typically recommended, as we only need an opaque yet reproducible value for
the purposes of identifying a service instance. Similar to what can be seen in the man page for the
[`/etc/machine-id`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html) file,
the underlying data, such as pod name and namespace should be treated as
confidential by this algorithm, being the user's choice to expose it or not via another resource attribute.

When a UUID v5 is generated, the input MUST be prefixed with
`${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}`, followed by the

> the workload identifier, which should tentatively stable. This means that the same service yields the

Reviewer: What's the workload identifier?

Reviewer 5: See @mx-psi's comment on "tenatively stable" here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/581#issuecomment-1845761900

Reviewer 5: Knowing that this may be derailing this already long-running discussion, I wonder if having a proper definition of a "workload identifier" (or how ever one want to call it) first, put that in an appropriate scope & field (`workload.id` or whatever) and then make use of it there. My reason for this is that the whole process outlined below (look for container properties, look for k8s properties, look for host properties, what about faas ID?, cloud provider IDs, etc?) is a separate concern, and is also something that might be relevant at different places as well: there is a need of knowing "where is my service" by identifying the closest piece of infrastructure abstraction.

Reviewer: Should add some sort of note / footnote describing what the workload identifier. Without one, it will just be a source of confusion for maintainers looking to implement this.

Author: I added a sentence about this.

Author: I'm marking this as resolved, further changes to the wording can be done in a follow-up PR.

same UUID if the same identifier (`host.id`, `/etc/machine-id`, and so on) remains the same. It would still
yield different results for different services on the same host or namespace. When no namespaces or equivalent fields
are available, the prefix MUST then be `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}`.

Users running their services on platforms such as Kubernetes are encouraged to explicitly set the

> `service.instance.id` using their existing automation, or by setting a value that can be used for a

Reviewer: Does "existing automation" mean using something like `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES=service.instance.id=${POD_ID}`?

consistent value, such as `container.id`. Similarly, users of application servers such as `unicorn`
are encouraged to set the `service.instance.id` on a per-worker basis.

SDKs MUST use the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`:

- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment

>   variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this will
>   always be used and honored over generated IDs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this MUST take priority over generated IDs.
```

Author: Suggestion incorporated!

  * `k8s.namespace.name`/`k8s.pod.name`/`k8s.container.name`, resulting in the input

>   `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${k8s.namespace.name}.${service.name}.${k8s.pod.name}.${k8s.container.name}`. In this case,

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${k8s.namespace.name}.${k8s.pod.name}.${k8s.container.name}`. In this case,
```

Reviewer 7: You cannot have multiple services on a single container.

Author: That's true: a pod name is unique across a namespace. For completeness, I think a service.name would be good to have and would probably be less confusing on future iterations of this. Unless you have reasons to remove the service.name, I'd keep it for consistency.

Reviewer 7: Yes, the reason is that the service.name may be missing - see [other comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/312#discussion_r1486488318)

Reviewer 7: OTOH, I would propose to allow for service name too

- k8s + service name -> java application server that serves multiple SDKs on the same pod (doesn't exist so far, but would make sense)
- k8s without service name -> service name might be missing, but it's good enough to identify service.instance.id

Reviewer 4: > k8s + service name -> java application server that serves multiple SDKs on the same pod (doesn't exist so far, but would make sense)

Don't we support tomcat with autoinstrumentation?

Reviewer 7: Yes, but you can't have have different service names for the deployed apps inside tomcat.

  * `container.id`, resulting in the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${container.id}`
  * `k8s.namespace.name`/`k8s.pod.name`/`k8s.container.name`, resulting in the input

>   `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${k8s.namespace.name}.${service.name}.${k8s.pod.name}.${k8s.container.name}`

Reviewer: Would these `k8s.*` attributes have to be user provided? I know the collector has a processor which can provide them, but I know at least in java there is no k8s resource provider. See list of available resource providers [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/tree/main/instrumentation/resources/library/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/resources).

If its not practical for the SDKs to have built in logic for detecting these attributes, does it make sense to include `service.instance.id` algorithm which depends on them?

Author: > I know the collector has a processor which can provide them

I'm not sure I'd rely on the collector to generate the service.instance.id. I'd prefer to have it closer to the workload, either by an operator or by the SDK.

> If its not practical for the SDKs to have built in logic for detecting these attributes

Almost all of them can be easily inferred by the SDKs:

- namespace name can be read from `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/namespace`
- pod name is typically the hostname. 

Although the best is to use the token file and base64 decode the payload:

- read /var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/token , which looks like this: `eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6IjJkRW5VaFh3bGtBU05xSlZyS3ZSNXlUN3htQUFaTng5M1ZWWEdXcWRkdmcifQ.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.Cn6WCtdoNc9BOUtCSHrEh729pQK1iG2L5dciNUJnVzvgDN12SPWVB0BmZ9YmzwCSzKqgmi0kyRAyCGaYs-2uyLl9h1mjwiEqAoN89d0vLExheAxOz1x76jAJWhvMxr-nzF-_qbBEOnypHzNCoBVMYNXhwRR36ipoIhst4LwDoLAqEKKU595jQinlid7X3GVOWx41HF3V3JLHmXLLW-RqILouf_GPdEBqG6DFB-sWMBLa3PE-Rt5d37786PgsC6UGORRjCLfN04bgbYL1YGKAULvgZzFEviyRC3s5KNZG1xhQBv4P0lhJJWOwKPvazXCUt5bAytTakaHBGzH_Pld7mw`
- split this token into three parts at each dot, get the part at [1] and base64 decode it. In the example above, it would yield this: `{"aud":["https://kubernetes.default.svc.cluster.local","k3s"],"exp":1733565833,"iat":1702029833,"iss":"https://kubernetes.default.svc.cluster.local","kubernetes.io":{"namespace":"default","pod":{"name":"shell-demo","uid":"43b45c48-7404-4501-b81b-0979c2614df3"},"serviceaccount":{"name":"default","uid":"f2e480c8-c039-4268-9aa7-3517ee9a4413"},"warnafter":1702033440},"nbf":1702029833,"sub":"system:serviceaccount:default:default"}` 

The container name cannot be inferred by the SDKs though. I can be provided by the Operator, which can also calculate the service.instance.id directly as well. People not using the operator might still want to have the SDKs generate the service.instance.id, but for that, they'd need to specify the container.name. And if they are specifying the container name, perhaps they should set the other ones explicitly as well.

In summary: the SDKs can infer most of the data, but container.name is still missing. I'd be fine in having the SDKs not implement this part of the algorithm, but I'd prefer if they could still generate a proper service.instance.id if the container.name is provided explicitly.

Reviewer: I think its probably fine to leave it as part of the algorithm. The code generating `service.instance.id` can look for this combination of resource attributes, and use them to generate if available. I suspect most of the time they won't be available, but simple enough if they are.

>   * `container.id`, resulting in the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${container.id}`,

Reviewer 7: `service.name` can actually be missing effectively  (e.g. `unknown_service:java`) - I think we should skip these variants then

Author: Service name is a required field, "unknown_service" is an anomalous situation. IMO, we should count on those attributes being present.

Reviewer 7: This is not the situation today - e.g. the javaagent uses unknown_service:java if it can't discover a name.

Reviewer 4: +1 to treating `unknown_service:.*` as the same as empty.

Worst cast, we degrade down to raw UUIDs here.   `service.name` is something we should encourage all users to fill out *and make it easy* with things like the otel-operator.  However, degrading to UUID gives decent o11y behavior.  We almost want failure to provide a better `service.instance.id` to be a FAQ of 

> Q: "why am i getting this sub-par instance id"
> A: "Go configure service.name"

Reviewer 7: I guess it boils down to the following question:

If, for whatever reason, we have no meaningful `service.name`, but have `host.id` (e.g. from `/etc/machine-id`) or `container.id`, we have those choices

-`${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${container.id}` - assuming that we probably only have a single service running on the host/container
- uuidv4 - assuming that the risk of a collision is too high

Author: If we assume that there's only one service running on a given container, there's no difference between using either version as the input for the UUID:

```
${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${container.id}
```
vs
```
${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${container.id}
```

Those two inputs have the same quality, given that the container-id _should_ be unique enough within a given namespace.

Reviewer 7: > Worst cast, we degrade down to raw UUIDs here

@jsuereth are you saying that we should always fall back to UUID if the service.name is missing, even if we're running on a pod container?

  * `host.id`, resulting in the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${host.id}`
- When the SDK is running in an environment where a `/etc/machine-id`
  (see [MACHINE-ID(5)](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html))
  is available, the machine-id should be used in the input for generating a UUID v5:

>   `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${machine.id}`

Reviewer: Would be great if all the algorithms could be based on resource attributes. That way, the SDK code generating `service.instance.id` could just run as the last step before the resource is resolved, inspect all the attributes that have been provided so far, and select the correct algorithm. Not fond of the idea of having the implementation have to go and inspect files in the OS.

Reviewer: I guess if machine id is important enough to include as a component of the prefix which generates `service.instance.id`, why isn't it important enough to define as a resource attribute?

Author: machine-id, along with other candidates, can be used as a source for host.id. Specifically for machine-id, it can't be used as-is in a resource attribute, as its man-page defines that it should be treated as confidential information.

- When the SDK is running on a Windows environment and there's a reasonable way to read
  registry keys for the SDK, the registry key
  `HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Cryptography\MachineGuid` can be used in a
  similar way to Linux' machine-id above.

> - When no other source is available the SDK MUST generate a value using UUID v1 or v4.

Reviewer: To be clear, if `service.namespace` isn't set, then we always fall back to a v1 / v4 UUID?

Author: No, there are scenarios where we don't have a namespace but still can generate a service.instance.id:

> When no namespaces or equivalent fields are available, the prefix MUST then be `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}`.

For instance, namespaces might not be available for services running on VMs or bare metal, but machine-id would. In that case, we can uniquely identify service instances running on different machines.

Author: I made it explicit in which step a namespace is required and in which it's optional.

Reviewer 4: Reopening this. I'd like to propose just ALWAYS allowing namespace to empty (i.e. empty is a valid namespace).

Author: Given that we talked about the latest state of the proposal via Slack, I'm closing this again. If this is not appropriate, let me know!

  no different than a completely new UUID per process.

Examples in Go, using the package "github.com/google/uuid" to generate the UUIDs:

```go
package main

import (
  "fmt"

  "github.com/google/uuid"
)

func main() {
  // fixed namespace for the purposes of this OTEP
  ns := uuid.MustParse("4d63009a-8d0f-11ee-aad7-4c796ed8e320")

  // prefix when no namespace is available
  prefix := "${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}"

  // prefix when a namespace is available
  prefix = "${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}"

  // actual prefix for the OTel Go SDK, for a service named "customers"
  prefix = "opentelemetry.go.customers"

  // the generated service.instance.id where a host.id is used
  host := "graviola"
  id := uuid.NewSHA1(ns, []byte(fmt.Sprintf("%s.%s", prefix, host))) // 17ffc8fd-6ed7-5069-a5fb-2fed78f5455f
  fmt.Printf("v5 host id: %v\n", id)

  // the generated service.instance.id where a typical kubernetes values are available
  namespace := "accounting"
  name := "vendors" // typically, the deployment name
  pod := "vendors-pqr-jh7d2"
  container := "some-sidecar"

>   input := fmt.Sprintf("opentelemetry.go.%s.%s.%s.%s", namespace, name, pod, container)

Reviewer: Is `opentelemetry.go` the workload identifier mentioned above? if so, this appears to be flipped from the language:

> When a UUID v5 is generated, the input MUST be prefixed with
`${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}`, followed by the
the workload identifier, which should tentatively stable. This means that the same service yields the

Author: - ${telemetry.sdk.name} is `opentelemetry`
- ${telemetry.sdk.language} is `go`

in containerized or Kubernetes environments. This means that the same service yields the
same UUID if the same identifier (`host.id`, `/etc/machine-id`, and so on) remains the same. It would still
yield different results for different services on the same host or namespace. When no namespaces or equivalent fields
are available, the prefix MUST then be `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}`.

For applications running behind an application server, such as unicorn, a stable identifier is not desirable, as
each worker thread typically is seen as a different instance.

SDKs SHOULD use the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`:

- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment
  variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this MUST take priority over generated IDs. The special value `uuidv4` means
  that a UUID v4 should be generated.
- When the language, framework, or platform has a native mechanism allowing workloads to be uniquely idenfiable, this mechanism MAY be used,
  either directly or as an input when generating UUID v5. A generated UUID v5 is preferable if the provided identifier isn't opaque and can

>   leak unwanted information about the workload (like a node name). An example of such native mechanism is Erlang's `erlang:node()`.

Reviewer 4: What's this about leaking unwanted information?  Can you clarify that?

Author: It's typically not a good idea to expose a hostname without the explicit request of users. For this reason, machine-id is an opaque UUID, for instance. So, while Erlang's `erlang:node()` provides the uniqueness we want, we should hash it (or use as source of UUID v5) instead of using its raw value.

  `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${k8s.namespace.name}.${service.name}.${k8s.pod.name}.${k8s.container.name}`. In this case,
  the namespace MUST be used.
  * `container.id`, resulting in the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${container.id}`,
  possibly without the `${service.namespace}`.
  * `host.id`, resulting in the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${host.id}`,
  possibly without `${service.namespace}`.
- When the SDK is running in an environment where a `/etc/machine-id`
  (see [MACHINE-ID(5)](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html))
  is available, the machine-id SHOULD be used in the input for generating a UUID v5 (possibly without the namespace):
  `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${machine.id}`
- When the SDK is running on a Windows environment and there's a reasonable way to read
  registry keys for the SDK, the registry key
  `HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Cryptography\MachineGuid` can be used in a

>   similar way to Linux' machine-id above.

Reviewer 7: iOS is not mentioned - maybe something like https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48116377/how-to-get-a-unique-id-of-a-mac-machine-in-2018 ?

| `service.instance.id` | string | The string ID of the service instance. [1] | `my-k8s-pod-deployment-1`; `627cc493-f310-47de-96bd-71410b7dec09` | Recommended |
| `service.namespace` | string | A namespace for `service.name`. [2] | `Shop` | Recommended |

> **[1]:** MUST be unique for each instance of the same `service.namespace,service.name` pair

Reviewer 6: Given that this text now spans more than hundred lines and involves a code sample, it shouldn't be a footnote anymore, but rather a section of the document.

Reviewer 6: I just saw that this was discussed before, I'd be fine leaving it as-is and changing it in a follow-up PR.

Author: I'll mark this as resolved, so that I can do this in a follow-up PR.

(in other words `service.namespace,service.name,service.instance.id` triplet MUST be globally unique).
The ID helps to distinguish instances of the same service that exist at the same time
(e.g. instances of a horizontally scaled service). It is preferable for the ID to be persistent
and stay the same for the lifetime of the service instance, however it is acceptable that
the ID is ephemeral and changes during important lifetime events for the service
(e.g. service instance restarts).

If the instance has no inherent unique ID that can be used as the value of this attribute,

> implementations MAY to generate a random Version 1 or Version 4

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
implementations MAY generate a random Version 1 or Version 4
```

[RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. When enough data is available,
implementations SHOULD use Version 5 and MUST use the following UUID as the namespace:
`4d63009a-8d0f-11ee-aad7-4c796ed8e320`.

UUIDs are typically recommended, as only an opaque yet reproducible value for
the purposes of identifying a service instance is needed. Similar to what can be seen in the man page for the
[`/etc/machine-id`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html) file,
the underlying data, such as pod name and namespace should be treated as
confidential by this algorithm, being the user's choice to expose it or not via another resource attribute.

When a UUID v5 is generated, the input MUST be prefixed with
`${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}`, followed by the

> the workload identifier, which should tentatively stable. The workload identifier is the final piece of

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the workload identifier, which should be tentatively stable. The workload identifier is the final piece of
```
or

```suggestion
the workload identifier, which should tentatively be stable. The workload identifier is the final piece of
```

Reviewer 8: Nit also: For the sake of making it short, maybe we can drop the "The workload identifier is the final piece of information" and maybe simply say "The workload identifier makes the source of telemetry to be uniquely identifiable". Or maybe just remote it completely?

Author: There have been questions in the past about what this workload identifier is. I'd rather keep this, risking being more verbose than needed, but extra clear.

information making the source of telemetry to be uniquely idenfiable. For instance, it might be the `container.id`
or `container.name` in containerized or Kubernetes environments. This means that the same service yields the

> same UUID if the same identifier (`host.id`, `/etc/machine-id`, and so on) remains the same. It would still

Reviewer 8: > This means that the same service yields the
same UUID if the same identifier (`host.id`, `/etc/machine-id`, and so on) remains the same

Not true given the `container.id` example for the workload identifier, right? Maybe we should remove it from the examples?

Author: Given the same workload identifier (machine-id, host.id, container.id, ...), the UUID is stable.

Reviewer 8: Right, what I meant is that if `container.id` is used, this part

> This means that the same service yields the same UUID if the same identifier (`host.id`, `/etc/machine-id`, and so on) remains the same.

Is not accurate, as the workload identifier (`container.id`) is changing every time. So that's why I mentioned to remove it from the list of examples :

> For instance, it might be the `container.id` or `container.name` in containerized or Kubernetes environments.

Author: True, I removed container.id from the example.

yield different results for different services on the same host or namespace. When no namespaces or equivalent fields
are available, the prefix MUST then be `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}`.

Users are encouraged to explicitly set the `service.instance.id` themselves, given they are in the best position
to determine what's a service instance. For instance, in some cases, all containers in a given pod might be part

> of the same service, while in other cases, each container would independently generate their own telemetry. When

Author: Yes. I could see a case where I'd want metrics from both containers to be reported as a single service. One case I've had is related to auth proxies: it's easier to correlate the auth proxy metrics with the protected backend if they have the same service.instance.id.

> of the same service, while in other cases, each container would independently generate their own telemetry. When

Author: Our default behavior is to have different resource attributes for different containers. If users deem two containers from the same pod to be the same "service instance", they should explicitly set the same service.instance.id to both containers.

> of the same service, while in other cases, each container would independently generate their own telemetry. When

Reviewer 5: That's totally fine with me, my comment was more around implicit assumptions that some vendors _might_ make around the `service.instance.id`. Both that's not a problem this PR (or the spec in general) needs to bother around, I was just curious :)

> it's not possible or desirable to explicitly generate a `service.instance.id`, users are encouraged to set set

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
it's not possible or desirable to explicitly generate a `service.instance.id`, users are encouraged to set
```

> enough information via their workload automation, such as Helm. In that case, SDKs would have enough information to

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
enough information via their workload automation, such as Helm. In that case, SDKs would have enough data to
```
Nit: I'd see this as data, and the `service.instance.id` as the actual information.

generate a `service.instance.id`. Future versions of the OpenTelemetry Operator might also have the ability to
generate the `service.instance.id` and set container-specific labels, given it is in a position to know all that

> metadata. When SDKs don't have sufficient information to generate a stable UUID, a random one is generated.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
metadata. When SDKs don't have sufficient data to generate a stable UUID, a random one is generated.
```
If you decide to adopt the prior suggestion :)

- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment
  variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this MUST take priority over generated IDs.
- When any of the below combinations of resource attribute are provided, they MUST be used as the input
  for generating a UUID v5 following the prefix mentioned above. The values within each combination MUST be separated with dots:
  * `container.id`, resulting in the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${container.id}`,
  possibly without the namespace.
  * `k8s.namespace.name`/`k8s.pod.name`/`k8s.container.name`, resulting in the input
  `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${k8s.namespace.name}.${service.name}.${k8s.pod.name}.${k8s.container.name}`. In this case,
  the namespace MUST be used.
  * `host.id`, resulting in the input `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.namespace}.${service.name}.${host.id}`,
  possibly without the namespace.
- When the SDK is running in an environment where a `/etc/machine-id`
  (see [MACHINE-ID(5)](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html))

>   is available, the machine-id should be used in the input for generating a UUID v5 (possibly without the namespace):

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  is available, the machine-id SHOULD be used in the input for generating a UUID v5 (possibly without the namespace):
```
Do we want to make this normative SHOULD?

Also: What does "possibly without the namespace" mean here? Does it mean it's optional in this case? If so, maybe change to "namespace is optional" instead? I feel right is a bit unclear what that means for SDK authors.

| `service.instance.id` | string | The string ID of the service instance. [1] | `my-k8s-pod-deployment-1`; `627cc493-f310-47de-96bd-71410b7dec09` | Recommended |
| `service.namespace` | string | A namespace for `service.name`. [2] | `Shop` | Recommended |

**[1]:** MUST be unique for each instance of the same `service.namespace,service.name` pair
(in other words `service.namespace,service.name,service.instance.id` triplet MUST be globally unique).
The ID helps to distinguish instances of the same service that exist at the same time
(e.g. instances of a horizontally scaled service). It is preferable for the ID to be persistent
and stay the same for the lifetime of the service instance, however it is acceptable that
the ID is ephemeral and changes during important lifetime events for the service
(e.g. service instance restarts).
If the instance has no inherent unique ID that can be used as the value of this attribute
it is recommended to generate a random Version 1 or Version 4

> [RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. Services aiming for reproducible UUIDs may also

Author: Good point, I changed some places to use it. Could you please check again?

> [RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. Services aiming for reproducible UUIDs may also

Author: I'm marking this as resolved, further changes to the wording can be done in a follow-up PR.

> [RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. Services aiming for reproducible UUIDs may also

Author: I'm opening an issue to clarify this further. I don't think this should block this PR, I'm therefore marking this as resolved.

https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/610

use Version 5. UUIDs are typically recommended, as we only need an opaque yet reproducible value for
the purposes of identifying a service instance. Similar to what can be seen in the man page for the
[`/etc/machine-id`](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html) file, the underlying data, such as pod name and namespace should be treated as
confidential by this algorithm, being the user's choice to expose it or not via another resource attribute.

When a UUID v5 is generated, the UUID's namespace MUST be set to:

> `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}`, so that the same service yields the

Reviewer 3: When we say "generated" supposedly this means generated by the SDK at startup time, right?

I am not sure I understand how to satisfy the requirements of UUID v5 generation. From [RFC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122#section-4.3) the very first step of generations is this:

>Allocate a UUID to use as a "name space ID" for all UUIDs
>      generated from names in that name space; see [Appendix C](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4122#appendix-C) for some
      pre-defined values.

The name space itself is not used for generating the UUID v5 directly. First you generate a new UUID and _allocate_ it to that name space. Then that allocated name space is used as the input to hashing algorithm (see subsequent steps of the algorithm in the RFC).

How exactly do you suggest that the SDK satisfies this requirement? It requires someone to take the value of `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}`, record it in some database, generate and allocate a corresponding UUID, store the UUID persistently and then use the UUID as the input to the hashing algorithm.

I fail to see how this is doable on the fly in the telemetry SDK.

I think there is some confusion here as to what a name space of a UUID v5 means. The name space is statically defined, for example the DNS is a pre-defined name space and its name space ID is defined in the RFC: 6ba7b810-9dad-11d1-80b4-00c04fd430c8.

You can say that OpenTelemety services are a name space and generate a name space ID for it that should be used by all SDKs. That name space ID must be recorded in Open Telemetry repositories, it cannot be generated at runtime.

So, again I do not see how a dynamic value like `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}` can be a name space.

I may be mising something here, please clarify.

Author: Thank you for your question, @tigrannajaryan, it was indeed missing a piece: a static value for the seed UUID, similar to the static ones defined in the spec.

What I had in mind was something like this:

```go
	ns := uuid.NewSHA1(uuid.MustParse("some-static-uuid"), []byte("${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}"))
	fmt.Printf("v5 ns: %v\n", ns)

	id := uuid.NewSHA1(ns, []byte("host.id"))
	fmt.Printf("v5 id: %v\n", id)
```

For the static UUID, I suggest "4d63009a-8d0f-11ee-aad7-4c796ed8e320", an opaque UUID v1 that I generated locally. If the code above looks reasonable to you, let me know and I'll change the OTEP to add both the static UUID and the clarifications needed, along with this code sample.

Reviewer 3: Is it a goal to be UUID v5 RFC compliant? According to the RFC the static UUID (namespace id) should be concatenated with the name and then hashed once (not twice like the code above does). If you want to use ${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name} as an input perhaps you can concatenate it with the host.id name (i.e. make it part of the name)?

I can't tell the significance of doing the generation exactly as the RFC does, perhaps it doesn't matter.

Reviewer 3: So, maybe simply use `${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}.${host.id}` as the name.

Author: The goal is to have it reproducible. Using a static UUID plus a string like you mentioned would achieve that goal as well:

```go
	id := uuid.NewSHA1(uuid.MustParse("4d63009a-8d0f-11ee-aad7-4c796ed8e320"), []byte("${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}.${host.id}"))
	fmt.Printf("v5 id: %v\n", id)
```

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think that works.

Author: Sorry for not updating this PR sooner, the static namespace for the UUID was determined in this thread, a few messages above. I've updated the algorithm and included a code example in Go. The essence of the document is the same, but it should be clearer now how it's supposed to work.

I included the namespace here as well: I originally left it out, as there are quite a few scenarios where it's not available, but given how common it is to run services in namespaced environment like Kubernetes, I decided to explicitly add it here as well.

Author: I'm marking this as resolved as I believe this has been addressed fully.

yield different results for different services on the same host.

Users running their services on platforms such as Kubernetes are encouraged to explicitly set the
`service.instance.id` using their existing automation, or by setting a value that can be used for a
consistent value, such as `container.id`. Similarly, users of application servers such as `unicorn`
are encouraged to set the `service.instance.id` on a per-worker basis.

SDKs are required to use the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`:

- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment
  variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this will
  always be used and honored over generated IDs.
- When any of the below combinations of resource attribute are provided, they should be used as the input
  for generating a UUID v5. The values within each combination should be separated with dots:
  * `container.id`
  * `k8s.namespace.name`/`k8s.pod.name`/`k8s.container.name`
  * `host.id`
- When the SDK is running in an environment where a `/etc/machine-id`
  (see [MACHINE-ID(5)](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html))

>   is available, the machine-id should be used as the input for generating a UUID v5.

Reviewer 3: So, ${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name} will be concatenated with one of these 4 and the result will be used as the "name" input to UUID v5 generation algo, right?

Author: Yes -- on my code example above, where you see "host.id", we'd have the machine ID instead.

SDKs are required to follow the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`:

- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment
  variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this will
  always be used and honored over generated IDs.
- When the `container.id` resource attribute is provided, it should be used as the input
  for generating a UUID v5.
- When the SDK can detect it's running on Kubernetes or derivatives, such as by checking the
  availability of a directory named `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io`, it should use
  the contents of the file `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/namespace`,
  along with the hostname and separated with a dot ("namespace.hostname") as the input
  for generating a UUID v5.
- When the SDK is running in an environment where a `/etc/machine-id` (see MACHINE-ID(5))
  is available, the machine-id should be used as the input for generating a UUID v5.
- When the SDK is running on a Windows environment and there's a reasonable way to read
  registry keys for the SDK, the registry key
  `HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Cryptography\MachineGuid` can be used in a

>   similar way to Linux' machine-id above.

Reviewer 6: Why not reference an ordered list of other (already existing) resource attributes that can be used, instead of duplicating information? Like this:
- [`container.id`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/resource/container.md#container)
- [`k8s.namespace.name`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/resource/k8s.md#namespace)/[`k8s.pod.name`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/resource/k8s.md#pod)/[`k8s.container.name`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/resource/k8s.md#container)
- [`host.id`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/resource/host.md#host)

And what's the benefit we get from "obfuscating" it by generating UUIDs? Wouldn't a readable K8s `namespace/pod/container` name combination be of much more use than a UUID created from it?

Author: I'll enhance the `container.id` rule to use your other values, thank you for that suggestion!

The idea of hashing that is to not unintentionally leak information about the environment. For instance, the man page for machine-id states:

> This ID uniquely identifies the host. It should be considered "confidential", and must not be exposed in untrusted environments, in particular on the network.

Given that we don't need those values in clear text, and users would obtain them that way if they so wish, I believe they should be used in a non-reversible algorithm.

**[1]:** A string value having a meaning that helps to distinguish a group of services, for example the team name that owns a group of services. `service.name` is expected to be unique within the same namespace. If `service.namespace` is not specified in the Resource then `service.name` is expected to be unique for all services that have no explicit namespace defined (so the empty/unspecified namespace is simply one more valid namespace). Zero-length namespace string is assumed equal to unspecified namespace.

> **[2]:** MUST be unique for each instance of the same `service.namespace,service.name` pair (in other words `service.namespace,service.name,service.instance.id` triplet MUST be globally unique). The ID helps to distinguish instances of the same service that exist at the same time (e.g. instances of a horizontally scaled service). It is preferable for the ID to be persistent and stay the same for the lifetime of the service instance, however it is acceptable that the ID is ephemeral and changes during important lifetime events for the service (e.g. service restarts). If the service has no inherent unique ID that can be used as the value of this attribute it is recommended to generate a random Version 1 or Version 4 [RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. Services aiming for reproducible UUIDs may also use Version 5.

Reviewer 3: Github/line length rant: this is such a long line, it is very hard to tell what has changed and github's diff is not helping. Reading both, I don't really see any change in the meaning, seems the link to RFC is added. Can you confirm?

Author: Correct. For completeness, here are the relevant snippet for both versions:

Before:
```
Version 1 or Version 4 RFC 4122 UUID (services aiming for reproducible UUIDs may also use Version 5, see RFC 4122 for more recommendations).
```

After:
```
Version 1 or Version 4 [RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. Services aiming for reproducible UUIDs may also use Version 5.
```

SDKs are required to follow the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`:
- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment
  variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this will
  always be used and honored over generated IDs.
- When any of the below combinations of resource attribute are provided, they should be used as the input
  for generating a UUID v5. The values within each combination should be separated with dots:
  * `container.id`
  * `k8s.namespace.name`/`k8s.pod.name`/`k8s.container.name`
  * `host.id`
- When the SDK can detect it's running on Kubernetes or derivatives, such as by checking the
  availability of a directory named `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io`, it should use
  the contents of the file `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/namespace`,
  along with the hostname and process ID (PID) separated with a dot ("namespace.hostname.pid") as the input

>   for generating a UUID v5.

Reviewer 3: Why do we prefer generating a UUIDv5 instead of using the input data directly as the instance id? Is the concern that the input data may be too large?

Author: I got this question a couple of times, perhaps it belongs to the convention itself? 

Here's what I added to the [2] item:

> UUIDs are typically recommended, as we only need an opaque yet reproducible value for the purposes of identifying a service instance. Similar to what can be seen in the man page for the `/etc/machine-id` file, the underlying data, such as pod name and namespace should be treated as confidential by this algorithm, being the user's choice to expose it or not

> - When the SDK is running in an environment where a `/etc/machine-id` (see MACHINE-ID(5))

Reviewer 3: Is MACHINE-ID(5) intended to be a link to man page?

Author: Yes! I added the link to the man page.

**[1]:** A string value having a meaning that helps to distinguish a group of services, for example the team name that owns a group of services. `service.name` is expected to be unique within the same namespace. If `service.namespace` is not specified in the Resource then `service.name` is expected to be unique for all services that have no explicit namespace defined (so the empty/unspecified namespace is simply one more valid namespace). Zero-length namespace string is assumed equal to unspecified namespace.

**[2]:** MUST be unique for each instance of the same `service.namespace,service.name` pair
(in other words `service.namespace,service.name,service.instance.id` triplet MUST be globally unique).
The ID helps to distinguish instances of the same service that exist at the same time
(e.g. instances of a horizontally scaled service). It is preferable for the ID to be persistent
and stay the same for the lifetime of the service instance, however it is acceptable that

> the ID is ephemeral and changes during important lifetime events for the service
> (e.g. service restarts).

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
the ID is ephemeral and changes during important lifetime events for the instance
(e.g. instance restarts).
```

Reviewer 4: Maybe even `service instance restarts`

If the service has no inherent unique ID that can be used as the value of this attribute
it is recommended to generate a random Version 1 or Version 4
[RFC 4122](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4122.txt) UUID. Services aiming for reproducible UUIDs may also

> use Version 5. UUIDs are typically recommended, as we only need an opaque yet reproducible value for

Reviewer 9: What do you mean a "reproducible value"?

Author: If I install a collector via RPM into my Fedora, I want the service.instance.id to be consistent across restarts/reboots.

> the purposes of identifying a service instance. Similar to what can be seen in the man page for the

Reviewer 9: Can we link to the man page? I'm not sure where I can look it up.

Author: I think I linked elsewhere in this doc, where MACHINE-ID(5) is mentioned. But this is the page: https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html

Author: I added a link here as well.

`/etc/machine-id` file, the underlying data, such as pod name and namespace should be treated as
confidential by this algorithm, being the user's choice to expose it or not via another resource attribute.
When a UUID v5 is generated, the UUID's namespace MUST be set to:
`${telemetry.sdk.name}.${telemetry.sdk.language}.${service.name}`, so that the same service yields the

> same ID if the same value (`host.id`, `/etc/machine-id`, and so on) remains the same. It would still

Reviewer 9: What if two instances of the same service are running on the host?

Author: Users would then have to override the service.instance.id.

Reviewer 9: This might be a common usecase tbh. For example running many single threaded processes to scale out (node.js, Python, have it as a common deployment model iiuc).

Reviewer 9: So I spoke to someone running Python and node in production. They use https://gunicorn.org/ for running 10 processes of the webserver (Python, ruby, node) on the same node.

However, they mentioned that it would be easy to assign an ID based on the process ID / worker ID if required. I wonder if we should call this out as this is a common use-case.

Author: We might need a semconv to cover that before we add it to this proposal here. I'll open an issue to track this.

Author: Created https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/426 to track this.

yield different results for different services on the same host.

SDKs are required to use the following algorithm when generating `service.instance.id`:

- If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment
  variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this will
  always be used and honored over generated IDs.
- When any of the below combinations of resource attribute are provided, they should be used as the input
  for generating a UUID v5. The values within each combination should be separated with dots:
  * `container.id`

>   * `k8s.namespace.name`/`k8s.pod.name`/`k8s.container.name`

Reviewer 10: `k8s.pod.name` will remain same for statefulset pods across recreates, but with other k8s controllers (deployment, cronjobs, etc) the pod name changes. So the uuid for statefulset pods will be the same with this combination even after a recreate. With other options in this section, the uuid does change when underlying host changes, except for statefulset pod. Should we make the change in uuid more consistent for k8s pods by using the `k8s.pod.uid` here?

Author: > So the uuid for statefulset pods will be the same with this combination even after a recreate

That's on purpose: on a previous discussion with @jsuereth, we agreed that we understand different restarts of stateful and daemon sets to be the same instance, similar to a process being restarted on the same machine (which would be using the /etc/machine-id in this logic).

  * `host.id`
- When the SDK is running in an environment where a `/etc/machine-id`
  (see [MACHINE-ID(5)](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/machine-id.html))
  is available, the machine-id should be used as the input for generating a UUID v5.
- When the SDK is running on a Windows environment and there's a reasonable way to read
  registry keys for the SDK, the registry key
  `HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SOFTWARE\Microsoft\Cryptography\MachineGuid` can be used in a
  similar way to Linux' machine-id above.

> - When no other source is available the SDK MUST generate a value using UUID v1 or v4.

Reviewer 6: > When no other source is available 

Does this "other source" only refer to sources explicitly mentioned in the points above, or would SDKs be allowed to leverage _any_ other source that makes sense?

E. g., when running in Azure Service Fabric, [the service instance id](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.fabric.statelessservicecontext.instanceid?view=azure-dotnet) would likely be a preferred choice. If we don't treat the list above as exhaustive that should be made more explicit.

Author: > Does this "other source" only refer to sources explicitly mentioned in the points above, or would SDKs be allowed to leverage any other source that makes sense?

SDKs are indeed allowed to use whatever makes sense. Is this ID only available for .NET? Or is there a common env var that would be available for all workloads?

Reviewer 6: I wonder why we couldn't use more vague (and concise) wording like this:

> SDKs MUST determine the value `service.instance.id` in the following way:
>
> - If the user has provided a `service.instance.id`, via environment variable, configuration or custom resource detection, this is used and honored over generated IDs.
> - If a meaningful id can be generated that is unique for each instance of the same `service.namespace,service.name` pair, then this id is used.
> - Otherwise, the SDK generates a value using UUID v1 or v4.

It seems to be this should be enough to fulfill the requirement of having different ids for each running service instance. It also relieves us from maintaining a (quite complicated) list that will always be incomplete. If needed, there could still be recommendations about how a meaningful id can be generated (as part of this document or separately), but I think specifying, discussing, and implementing a detailed algorithm doesn't provide much benefit.

Author: That's true, but the value I see from specifying the behavior is that this is consistent across languages and wouldn't leave users wondering why one service written in X shows a consistent ID on a specific machine while another service written in Y and running on the same machine doesn't. We can split the list and precedence of those values into another doc, but those should exist in a place that maintainers can easily see.

Reviewer 6: > SDKs are indeed allowed to use whatever makes sense.

Given that, you'll still not get fully consistent behavior across languages. However, you admittedly get more overlap.

Author: I believe those other use cases would be the fallbacks for specific situations. Given the same environments and conditions, two workloads would act the same. Before falling back to generating a random UUID, one language might still try another approach that is specific to it.
